Hidden Valley Road GMT20200619-173250_BTAwebcas
Thu, Jan 09, 2025 8:49AM

1:30:13

SUMMARY KEYWORDS

Hidden Valley Road, Robert Kolker, mental health, Bowen theory, self variations, family dynamics,
schizophrenia, chronic anxiety, genetic research, emotional fusion, parental triangle, functional self,
solid self, family environment, psychiatric hospitalization

00:00
Okay, hello for the last well, webcast and the academic year for us, I guess. And I have it all on
PowerPoint today, so we'll go to that actually right now, and I'll explain what I've been trying to
do with this once we get started. So the first slide, please. Just a minute. You

01:08
wait. Okay, well, you can see

01:15
the cover of this book, Hidden Valley Road

01:21
by Robert Coker. I think it's Lois Walker in Vancouver that I need to thank for calling that book
to my attention. It's just a fascinating book. This is the first presentation that I've ever done on
it. Just finished it this morning, actually, and couldn't include everything I wanted to include. I
really think this would be good required reading for any first year student in the mental health
specialty to get them oriented. It's I can't be more positive about it. So also, I'd like feedback at
the end from some of you at least, as to whether this style of presenting works. And I'll be
talking about the PowerPoints and whether they add or detract to following along. Okay. Next
slide, please. I want two quotes here to set the stage. Next one. This is from the book itself. On
page 330 Lindsay, one of the people you'll get to know in this presentation, understood now
more than ever that we are more than just our genes. We are, in some ways, a product of the
people who surround us, the people we were forced to grow up with, and the people we choose
to be with later, our relationships can destroy us, but they can change us to and restore us and
without us ever seeing it happen, They define us. We are human because the people around us

make us human. I was very taken by that quote, whoa. Come back to Lindsay, a character in
the story a little bit later. Next one please. And this is to say that the primary did I miss a slide
here? No,

03:50
no, I missed something like this is the next slide. The primary purpose of doing this
presentation is to illustrate the concept that is routinely missing from the understanding of
clinical problems in mainstream psychiatry and medicine. Bowen theory's concept of self and
variations of self on a continuum in the human population worldwide, I have to let

04:22
this person in.

04:24
All right, yeah, I'm missing a slide here.

04:42
Just joined. Would they please

04:45
with person who just joined? Please turn off their audio.

04:50
This is pretty disruptive.

04:53
I've had to stop the slide presentation to bring you in. You.

05:00
Sorry, everybody else. We'll resume in one second.

05:19

05:19
Okay, yeah,

05:23
okay, what's the next slide? Please put your computer away. I just if I want to use the
computer. Mike, please, please, just show me the that's the first second slide. And what's the
next slide?

05:42
Mike, you're going to have to work off of this. Please put your computer away.

05:45
Just tell me what the next slide is. Let's go to it. Yeah, somehow I missed a somehow left a slide
out of this presentation,

06:02
and I wanted to definitely

06:06
alert you to it.

06:18
I don't know why it's not there, but it didn't okay. We'll just skip it. It was a quote from rd Lang,
actually, who I thought is one way to introduce what I'm talking about here today, but, but not
to equate in any way rd Lang with Bowen theory and his ideas. But there, there is a relationship
of sorts there. So that's why I had this slide. Okay, next slide please. So these next three slides
are of the family that's featured in Hidden Valley Road, the gal Galvin, family for the husband
and the plainy Blaney, I think family for the for the wife. So as you can see, the husband in this
case, Don Galvin, born 1924

07:27
died 1975

07:33
I think I got that wrong, but he's the youngest of the three. If there are other siblings, they

I think I got that wrong, but he's the youngest of the three. If there are other siblings, they
weren't mentioned in this book. And Mimi over there on the right side, originally lived in
Houston, Texas, oldest daughter of two girls, and her parents divorced, and then her mother
remarried and divorced again, and they were living in Queens, New York at that point. So Don
and Mimi, the next generation, most of their lives have been in Colorado Springs. Don was
involved with the Air Force Academy, and they lived in Colorado Springs, and they married in
1944 they're both deceased now, but they had 12 children now, these ones that are spackled
are the ones who, at some point in their lifetime received the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Now,
that particular phrase didn't stick for all of them. Some were shifted to bipolar and that sort of
thing. They're all quite impaired. So that was six of the 12. The first were boys, 10 boys, and
then two girls came along.

09:18
Next slide, please. So

09:23
so these are just to show that their connections. Donald did marry Jean, and they eventually
divorced. We'll be talking a lot about that. Jim married Kathy. That marriage lasted longer, but
it was real problematic. Jean John and Nancy are the first of the three not to get diagnosed.
Have stayed, kept their distance from the family as a couple with two children, but he has been
free of anything. Close to psychotic symptoms. You see Brian there the fourth and we'll be
talking about him. That's noni, his girlfriend who he ultimately killed and then killed himself.
We'll come back to that. Then Michael, with two marriages, a couple of kids, Richard with a
marriage and divorce. One kid, Joseph the next, the fourth brother to receive a schizophrenia
diagnosis.

10:34
Mark,

10:36
no diagnosis, but also a divorce. Second marriage successfully, Matthew And then Peter, the
last two boys, both who received that diagnosis in their lifetimes, and it stuck in one form or
another in the psychotic Lee range. And then Margaret and Lindsay the last two. Margaret was
married to first husband, and then that split, and now has been successfully married to a
second one, and then Mary, who took a name Lindsay for a number of reasons, also as a middle
name, married Rick, and they have two kids. The older daughter is the first born. Actually works
in a lab now studying the genetics of schizophrenia.

11:37
Next slide please. So

11:42
I wanted to have a section about Mary, because I think Mary is the best functioner Out of the 12
and how she got there, in addition to her position in the family early on growing up. But this is
about Donald, the firstborn son that I mentioned. I called the father Don and the son Donald.
And I'm just going to read you some quotes from the book and follow let you follow along.
Some of these are paraphrased. Donald was not what his parents assumed him to be, not, in
other words, not like his father. He was a quiet kid, not super, super popular. He got average
grades and liked to be alone. He went to Colorado, state for college, not the Air Force Academy,
like his father did. Growing up as the oldest, he exercised supreme authority over his young,
younger siblings. He was a mischief maker, a bully and instigator of chaos, and could be mean
and aggressive with his brothers. When some of the kids told the parents about Donald's mean
behavior, they took no action. They couldn't believe Donald was capable of doing negative
things to his siblings. Donald was said to be Dad's favorite. And these, all these facts, come
from Cloakers interviewing of the surviving children. I think when he got this book started, both
parents had died, so Donald was dad's favorite, but his siblings were terrified of him. Most of
the sibling interactions were also about domination on down the line, one dominating the next,
etc. On the other hand, he was a clean cut team who was featured in a photo that took up half
the front page of a new local newspaper. Donald was a subject of great admiration in and out of
the family around age 17, Donald, standing in front of the kitchen sink, unexpectedly smashed
10 dishes to pieces

14:17
That night.

14:19
Again, Don and Mimi wrote it off. However, Don suspected there was something wrong with
Donald. Donald felt trapped, frustrated that he was not the person he wanted to be, and this is
around age 17, Donald was growing more afraid and sensed that something was happening to
him. When Donald started at Colorado State in 1963 his inner fears were not on display, not
even to his family.

14:55
His goal was to be a doctor.

14:59
When Donald. Donald spent time from college at home, the fierce sibling conflicts were
unchanged, especially between Donald and the number two brother, Jim. Donald punched out
Jim with a full right uppercut that knocked him out.

15:19
Next one. Next one please.

15:23
Oh. At the beginning of his sophomore year at CSU, Colorado State, he went to the Campus
Health Center because of a cat bite. He offered no explanation of how it happened. Later in the
spring of his second year, Donald returned to the health center, this time, worried that he was
infected with syphilis, getting it from his roommate, even though no sexual intercourse had
occurred in April 16, 1965 he visited the health center for a third time, claiming that one of his
brothers had attacked him and was causing him now back pain. He spent one night in the
infirmary in the fall of 1965 now a junior, he was attending a pep rally and jumped inexplicably
into the bonfire and set his sweater on fire. Staff members had to go in and pull him out,
learning what happened. The health center staff pulled Donald out of his classes and sent him
for a psychiatric evaluation after four visits with the psychiatrist that fall in january 1966 he
wrote that Donald had no evidence of a psychotic process. The doctor recommended that
Donald go back to his classes but continue with psychiatric help. The psychiatrist did say that
Donald had emotional conflicts that could have played a role in his action, but that was not
specified. So Donald propelled himself back to campus life and study at the start of 1966 he
experienced significant emotional distance from others, leading to his feeling desperate for
people connections, especially with a female he still hoped he could be the man his parents
thought he could be. He did connect with a female classmate, even talked marriage to her, but
the relationship ended. She ended it, and that wasn't specified what happened. Donald was
shattered by this, but told no one. He pursued the girl with multiple phone calls, but to no avail.
Donald was also in a rather desperate financial circumstance, but could not admit it. Admit it to
his parents. He could not pay the rent on where he had been living, but did find an abandoned
fruit seller near campus. He had electricity and heat there, but no water. This was in the fall of
1966 his junior year, beginning, he was sleeping there on a mattress alone at nights. It went on
this way for many months. He eventually went back to the health center, reporting he had
again been bitten by a cat. The center referred him back for a full workup by the psychiatrist.
He opened up to the doctor this time regarding doing bizarre, destructive things. He was
fixated on death and ending his own life. He said things were getting worse for him. He said he
had killed a professor and thought about killing another person. He also reported two suicide
attempts in his life, one at age 12. The doctor also found that he had in fact, killed the cat. He
diagnosed Donald with possible schizophrenic reaction. By the end of 1966 Donald was saying
that the CIA was after him. He told his family they were all being shot at hearing this, his
parents went and got him, bringing him home. They rejected the idea of a psychiatric hospital,
opting for he will get better on his own. Don and maybe did take Donald to the Air Force
Academy Hospital, which was where Don was still employed, and to a physique. Physician, the
galvins knew very well, the doctor wrote Colorado State a letter stating Donald had been had
an acute situational reaction. Said bad, bad breaks had caused it, and now he was better. It
enabled Donald to return to school after Christmas, 1966 when he returned to school, he was
seeing therapists at the health center, and was said to be not, not to be psychotic. Donald then
started dating again and got engaged again several months. After several months, the parents
became ambivalent about the relationship. Jean, the woman he was engaged to, did not want
children, which upset Donald a great deal. Meanwhile, Donald and Mimi are telling no one
about Donald's breakdown. Donald continues with therapist appointments at the health center.
Breakdown being the night he jumped in the bonfire. John and Jean's marriage in 1967
deteriorated rapidly over its first three years. His psychiatrist observed that Donald exercised

rigorous self control that flattened his personality. I thought that was an interesting way to
think about the flattened affect of the four A's of schizophrenia, that it's a rigorous form of self
control, not that the person is lacks emotion.

21:35
Could be gene complained

21:39
of his distancing resistance to any sexual activity and often threatening nature. Donald said, I
am a mirror of what other people want me to be. Now, when I read that in the book, the first
time I said I got to do a presentation about this, I've never seen it laid out so clearly what it's
like being a person with very little solid self? The psychiatrist said that he had given into Gene's
demands, suppressed his own feelings and had trouble expressing any emotions. Donald said,
I'm a child fear, fearful of making any decisions, he once tried to kill gene and himself, but did
not succeed. Donald was increasingly losing it, and was diagnosed as having paranoid
schizophrenia. He was committed to Pueblo State Hospital in 1970 he fought the hospital every
step of the way. Donald's first fiancee had left him now, Gene had filed for divorce while he was
in the hospital. This is after three years of marriage. Donald was released from this first
hospitalization after a few weeks, and received no jail time for his threats and actions to Gene
Donald went to live with his parents. His parents had hidden these recent events from family
and others. I mean, there's also quite a conspiracy, in a sense, going on here, Donald flips out
again rather quickly, and the police took him back to the hospital. The section second
hospitalization did nothing to reduce the fighting between Donald and Jim. It totally destroyed
Thanksgiving dinner that year, Donald was now having religious delusions and hallucinations.
The drug stelazine helped him realize that his spiritual delusions were, in fact, not reality.
Donald was severely shaken by the loss of gene it triggered him back into psychosis. His
psychiatrist suggested that Donald seemed to choose to become psychotic again, in face of this
serious relationship, disruption, disruption, interesting perspective, I thought, choosing to
become psychotic again. I remember in reading about John Nash, he talked a lot about the
comfort he felt from being psychotic, that it could stabilize him and not let him feel feel so
isolated. Donald decided not to try to contact gene again, after his actions landed him back in
the hospital again. He improved there, got a job and was released in May, 1972 however, the
cycle started again. He physically threatened his parents. His mother got a court order to send
him to the state hospital. Yet again, he was discharged in August, 19. 72 in the spring of 1973
he was admitted to Oregon State Hospital when he was again trying to contact his ex wife. He
was confused, disoriented, uncooperative, and had no memory of that hospitalization. Then in
the fall of 1973 his fourth brother, Brian, shot and killed his girlfriend, Noni, with whom he had
broken up about a month earlier. Then he shot and killed himself. Donald attended the funeral,
but was soon back in the hospital with very intense religious delusions. He was hospitalized
now for five months. This did not stop him from looking for Gene Donald continued to cycle in
and out of the hospital. Once, three of the brothers were in the hospital. Pueblo state at the
same time. Next one, Donald, walked 200 miles a week. Just put that in because of the kind of
energy this guy had. He was living with his parents. Jobs came and went. He did this while
engaging religious visions and preaching religion to whomever would listen, over the next 10
years, he had six hospitalizations at Pueblo state. Don and Mimi were becoming increasingly
afraid of Donald and told him to get his own apartment. His parents eventually accepted him

back with them, and he lived peacefully there between 1980 and 1983 While Donald was at
home, he accompanied his mother, doing grocery shopping, did household chores and give
gave me a sense of purpose. Was described as he stayed out of the hospital for seven years,
taking anti psychotic meds, even though there's no guarantee there, and a mood stabilizer. He
tried living in a boarding house, but that never lasted very long. He would decompensate there,
and that would trigger a hospitalization in the 1990s Donald confided in Mimi that as a teen, a
close family friend sexually abused him. It turned out to be a priest of homosexual abuse. His
mother began blaming the priest for the state of her family. Mimi renounced her faith over it,
which was Catholic Donald. Donald's mind could still go off the rails with crazy ideas continuing
to be part of him after his mother died, he told the author of this book that Mimi was too bossy,
too bossy.

28:12
Next one. So my conclusion

28:17
about the overall process of Donald's life is that his lack of self is reflected in the behaviors that
surfaced leading up to his psychosis. I think this is a better explanation than the term
schizophrenia offers he had so little self an associated high level of chronic anxiety for all the
vulnerabilities you just heard about that it got eventually bound, as Bowen theory would say, in
the psychotic process, and maybe stabilized him a bit as long as he could stay out of the
hospital, because the hallucinations and delusions did not Go away on medication, but it did
calm him. Powerful brain disturbances is one of the many places such anxiety can come to rest.
Time does not permit a discussion of how psychiatry has dealt with a nature, nurture dilemma.
The book covers it extremely well. I found that those sections very, very interesting, bringing
me up to speed on things that I was unclear about, about genetic research and schizophrenia,

29:31
and has wound up

29:37
concluding that nature and nurture are both important genes do not cause it, but are part of
the total total project. Now I was going to do a piece about Mary, who I think is probably the
best functioner in the family unit, and now is definitely a big Mother of the next generation. As
well as a review of the science that was presented. But time does not permit that, so I decided
to now talk about the relationship between Don and Mimi, and there is many things about that
spread throughout the book. So after having Peter, the doctors told Mimi she should not have
any more kids. Mimi did not go for it. She still wanted 12 kids, even after number 11 was the
first female. She was 40 when Mary was born, when Margaret told Mimi and that Jim had
molested her as a kid, Jim is number two. Margaret would be number 11. Mimi sloughed it off.
That gives you a kind of a flavor, I think, nicely, kind of the atmosphere inside this family and
how they dealt with their own anxieties by, for example, sloughing it off despite all that had

gone on with their children's first hospitalizations, Mimi and Don and Don Colonel Gavin now
remained optimistic about the future. Mimi blamed Donald's wife for the problems in their
marriage. No big surprise there. Mimi was a perfectionist, but she tolerated Donald acting crazy
in their home. Everyone in the house on Hidden Valley Road seemed to be operating in a world
of no consequences. Donald once threatened Mimi with a knife when John brought Nancy, his
future wife, to to be home to meet his family, the house was dominated by hiding Donald from
view and outwardly denying anything was wrong. Gets a little spooky. I think Nancy later
commented that the house seemed like an emotional Shambles drenched in confusion and
anarchy.

32:12
Next one, please.

32:15
Oh. Mimi's classic lecture to her kids was it's my way or the highway, in connection with the
disturbance of some sort with the neighbor, she denied that her boys had done anything wrong.
Over time, Mimi became embittered. She could get nasty at the kids actions and accuse them
of being just like Donald at home, Don bask in the powder familiarist role while Mimi handled
the details next one, Don enrolled in night classes at the University of Colorado in pursuit of a
PhD in Political Science, Don was devoted to his own interests. Mimi described him as an
armchair father. He was away from the house a lot while Mimi maintained the routine. Don had
parachute out of C 47 rappelled down cliffs with his father, played ice hockey, was a track
store, all state Lightman on his high school team. He was popular, well liked and handsome,
just like his father. Don the father retired from the Air Force in 1966 seeking a new seeking a
new over job overseeing programs funded by the federal government, his sons were in awe of
their dad. Don and Mimi were also part of the arts and culture scene. Don often told Mimi, the
boys should not be coddled that they should leave the nest and take care of themselves.
Donald and Jim were still functioning okay at that point, but Mimi feared if she did not do right
by all things would crumble. Don gets his PhD at age 44 brother, Brian broke up in August 1973
with his girlfriend. Brian and noni had argued constantly after the breakup in September, 1973
Brian shot and killed noni then shot and killed himself. The parents told their children that they
had been killed in a bicycle accident. Don suffered a stroke in january 1975 at age 51 he was
hospitalized for six months. He. Left with a right sided paralysis and no short term memory, lost
all memory of anything since 1945 Don continued to accuse Mimi of babying the boys believing
as he did in the school of hard knocks. Murray Mimi responded this time by saying, we let Brian
go and look what happened. I'm done with letting them go. Don, when their 10th son, Peter was
hospitalized psychiatrically,

35:34
he wrote that Mimi,

35:38
the psychiatrist, wrote that Mimi was unwilling or unable to hear unpleasant news. Mimi did

the psychiatrist, wrote that Mimi was unwilling or unable to hear unpleasant news. Mimi did
what not want to listen to her son's hallucinations and

35:50
fears

35:53
at family meetings. When Peter was hospitalized, he would rest his head on the on his mother's
chest, and would show a smile like a contented infant. To the doctor, the dynamical,
omnipotent mother and dependent boy was most comfortable for her children to fall into sorry
for the misspellings the doctor implied to Mimi, she was a prime mover in Peters and, by
extension, all the others mental breakdowns. Both Don and Mimi were stunned and defensive.
Mimi Resolved never to let University doctors near her sons again. From then on, it would be
the state hospital at Pueblo or no hospital. Donald slowly recovered from his CVA, but could not
work. His only source of income was his military pension. He wanted Donald and Peter not to
live with them, but maybe, maybe blocked the idea. Michael never diagnosed with
schizophrenia, blamed a repressive upbringing for his sick brother's problems. Following
Margaret's and later, Mary's accusation of sexual abuse by their brother, Jim Mimi told them
that her father had taken liberties with her and that her mother's second husband sexually
preyed on Mimi's sister Betty, eventually Don locked Jim out of the house permanently. A
genetic researcher studying their family was struck by Mimi's determination to care for her six
seriously impaired children and her post CVA husband, Don's first cancer diagnosis was in the
late 1980s he died of cancer in 2003

37:55
it was A carcinoma on his head

37:59
in 1980s the cancer spread, and he had three treatment periods over the next 15 years, finally
dying when both Margaret and Mary Lindsay had told their mother about Jim's sexual abuse.
Amy partly excused Jim because he was sick neighbors in the Hidden Valley Road social
network saw Mimi as a saintly in her devotion to family. Doctors generally saw Mimi as pleasant
and never out of control. She seemed a happy warrior. Mimi's Short Fuse occurred with her
sons. Donald eventually lived full time with his parents. He spent much of his time in his room.
Mimi insisted it was Don who wanted the 12 kids. She served everyone she converted to
Catholicism, later renouncing it. She blamed DOM Don's side of the family for the
schizophrenia, believing it was inherited from the Galvin side. Mimi often felt judged by her
daughters when her daughters were adults meeting, Mimi told them that their father had been
hospitalized at Walter Reed psychiatric ward for depression early in their marriage. She also
said that he had had multiple affairs with women during their marriage. The book author
describes what he learned about Mimi from her adult children that led, led him to conclude that
Mimi was averse to self reflection, a perfectionist, as mentioned earlier, made many mean
remarks and used the word should a lot in relationship with her family members. By 2016 none

of the board. Boys live with her any longer, Donald had moved into assisted living, with Mary
Lindsay helping him when needed. Mimi was quite saddened by losing Donald's company. Mimi
believed she had been a good mother, but a pine that she said yes to the boys too many times,
Margaret had been left out because her mother had focused so much. Felt left out because her
mother felt had focused so much on their sons. She was never schizophrenic. Mimi continued to
think that it was when the boys left home that his problems arose. Their problems arose. Mary
Lindsey learned that for several years before he died, her father was having regular outpatient
department electroconvulsive therapy at Pueblo state for depression, but hid that from his kids.
Mimi knew, but never told the kids either. Mimi was never persuaded that nurture had anything
to do with what happened in her family. It was genetically caused Mary Lindsay, and Lindsay
actually gave herself that middle name when she was sent to Hotchkiss to finish school. She
thought being called Lindsay help her fit in better there, for some reason, anyway, so she
became Mary. Lindsay told her mom that she was not convinced that nature had not been part
of her brother's problems. Nurture had not been part of her brother's problems. And this is an
example of, I think, what Mary was able to gain, and she was in individual psychotherapy, and
sound like she got a lot out of it, Mary Lindsay gradually became less faulting of her parents,
reasoning that her parents did not comprehend that things were going off the rails when they
were Mary Lindsay was also impressed with all the siblings had the amazing ability to shape
their own reality. She viewed the schizophrenia as an outcome of nature and nurture working
together. And again, if you think back in that quote at the beginning that I gave that was
Lindsay. So my conclusion about the don don Mimi Mimi Donald parental triangle and other
nuclear family members is that clearly this was a poorly differentiated family system. I think
I've presented pretty good evidence for that. The typically encountered problem of assessing
the intensity of the child focus and the unresolved attachment to the family of origin is common
for all of us. In Bowen theory, a problem is that the concept of emotional fusion is not in the
consciousness of researchers. John McGrath is an Australian epidemiologist states psychosis is
just what the brain does when it is not working well, I was fascinated by that it's different than
sort of looking for the specific cause. This way of understanding the brain fits well with Bowen
theory in that the chronic anxiety associated with a person's basic level of self may play a key
role in interfering with the brain working well. This does not dismiss the role of genes in
activating a person's vulnerabilities. Reading this man's summary of the research,
unfortunately, he never heard about Murray Bowen. He quoted Ted, let's in there, and it's the
all the old stuff about deprivation and and that kind of thing. So I guess that's it. So again, I'd
like to invite comments on the matter of presenting this, whether those slides were helpful to
help you read along as I presented a lot of different information, as well as on the your
thoughts about the clinical case in general.

44:32
If you all could

44:35
activate your video and type into the chat room if you have a question or comment that you
missed Mick, when you are given the go ahead, then you can activate your mic.

44:56

Randy, are you in the queue? I. I am.

45:03
He's a he's our favorite lead off here, we're here.

45:09
I was just wondering Dr Kerr whether there was enough information in the book to understand
how, from the standpoint of nurture and emotional process, the children who became
schizophrenic became schizophrenic. In other words, Was there enough information to explain
the the intensity, the greater intensity, of the attachment to some of the children versus other
others of the children, was that part of the scene.

45:55
I don't think there was enough attention to that. Let me say I had a thought that this went out
of my head about how to respond, but I can't, I can't remember what I was going to say. Okay,

46:17
well then, uh, you know, you the book apparently refers to the combination of genes, you know,
nature and nurture. Is there any further information? Current information in the book about
genes and their relationship to schizophrenia? My impression is that that's still pretty murky.

46:46
Yeah, I was surprised. Now I'm remembering what I because the this family was severely
scrutinized with all DNA samples taken, and

47:03
it was evident that

47:06
not all the sibling Well, there was a evidence of what was called, oh, I'm forgetting the name,
but it's a delay in brain processing, And it was associated with a particular gene, and that that
gene was present in many of the family members, not everybody, but not all those members
were psychotic. And I think that was useful, just opening the door to just because the gene is
there. It's not destiny. And it was some kind of delay in response. It would, you sort of, you
would think could, could have been involved where the person can't habituate when they they

react to something and then they have trouble. Next time the same thing happens, they do it
again and again and again and again. There's an absence of what I think psychologists call
habituation, and that seemed to fit with what could go wrong with a schizophrenic mind. But,
you know, it didn't prove anything. And the most powerful thing, I think, was that at the end,
two of the most famed research researchers in genetics concluded that the family is very
important in this and we need to understand that better. The family, the family. It's not just
about looking at genes or what genes activate in the body. So that was encouraging. Yeah.

48:55
Final question was epigenetics included in the analysis of the relation between family
environment and genetic expression, absolutely

49:08
got some emphasis, because that was is a good as you well know, a good place to think about
the interplay of environment with genetics and that mutations aren't necessarily necessary. It
could be more about gene regulation. And I think that's really Waddington first, I think
emphasized that idea epigenetics back in the early 70s, famous biologist and I and now that
that definitely opens the door for what are the environmental stimuli that are making carrying
this vulnerability into a problem, and as I wrote at the end of my presentation, I think the. Idea
of chronic anxiety and how it can come out of a position in the family over time, can then affect
the brain through activation of various physiological systems, including the inflammatory
system. So the book that's left me thinking that it's not psychiatry may not be as polarized as it
used to be, at least, according to with this author, bleen, from talking to lots of these
researchers, that they were leaving room for nature and nurture. And nurture is not about
deprivation or child abuse necessarily, although it can be part of it. But as you know, it's part
it's part and parcel, related to the unresolved attachment to the family, and that's so hard to
quantify, again, as we both know and but anyway, I recommended that book for anybody
starting out in the mental health professions, because it is so thorough and gives us a great
picture of, like, the Don's story, Donald story, I was fascinated by where you could just sort of
trace he was reasonably okay, even though it's a very aggressive, domineering sibling with his
younger sibs, until it's liftoff time, about 17, and then how ill equipped he himself feels about
going out in the world, and how much anxiety that would then generate. All that, I think, can be
explained best by the concept of level of self, something you've spent a lot of time thinking
about. And then the psychosis can pile in on top of that, as where the anxiety gets bound, and I
think that's where genetics comes in and and other factors, Maybe toxins, bacteria, who knows
to fill the gap to Okay, oh, you read this book. Kim, great. You said you were struck by how
average his family was by standards of how I for one experience growing up at that time. Well,
hopefully you're not carrying the gene. So the next is Victoria. Yeah, I just want to stick with
that how average his family was by standards of how I, for one, experienced growing up at that
time, just a very interesting thought to reflect on. I mean, this I would agree with, was it Kathy
John's wife, he bought, brought her home to meet the family and and she was just saw chaos
everywhere, and anarchy, etc, and all the words she used to describe it. This was not your
average family fortunately, I don't think by a long shot. But again, where does it exist on the
continuum? Harder to specify and hard for science to include it as a variable if it doesn't even
know about it, okay, Victoria, go ahead. Victoria, Houston was part of your layout, and Mimi
Galvin or Mimi Blaney eventually lived there for a while, then they went to New York.

54:01
Well, it can happen anywhere. Yeah, we'll pick on some would say Houston has its particular
challenges. Mike, I was Dr Kerr, I was wondering if you had designed this book, if you had
interviewed the family are been involved. What more would you have added? What? Yeah,
what else would you want to include to get a bigger, fuller picture?

54:35
Well, I would think anything that gave some inkling of the intensity of the unresolved
attachments and the variation among the kids. There's a nice example with Mary, the youngest
from an early age, having the confidence in herself to stand up in a, I don't know, first grade
classroom or whatever it was. I. And when people said, how many are voting for Nixon, how
many are voting for voting for McGovern, she says, McGovern, McGovern, McGovern. She was
the only one in the class that did that, and she was considered just more settled and organized.
Margaret was not that way, and Margaret has a lot of grievances against the family.
Fortunately, she and Kathy have a pretty good relationship that Kathy values. I mean, excuse
me, Mary values this as much as

55:34
she does.

55:36
So how to get at this intensity in a more objective way. You know, it's there with all this chaos.
How to describe it in more detail, exactly how this plays out?

55:52
Well, I know I was wondering about the past two or three generations in terms of whether there
was any contact with grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, for some more than others, less for
others. You know, was there more of Was there some of that or none of that?

56:19
I don't remember, but I don't think that was covered hardly at all. Yeah, there's reference to to
the parents of Don and Mimi, okay, but what the parents came from? I don't think there's no
data in there about that. Yeah.

56:45
Well, thank you. This was an interesting presentation, and I want to go read the book.

56:49
It's well worth it. I check it out. Yeah, thank you. Amy post and Baltimore, or

57:00
maybe Bowen county or the Outer Banks of North Carolina. Okay, I thought I had two kind of
thoughts that emerged from your presentation. One, I think the book highlights how you could
have plenty of good external functioning and still kind of be showing up in your family in a
really different way. And I thought that highlighted for me the difference between functional
self and solid self. And I wondered what would have happened in this family if less energy had
been put on appearances and kind of how they were perceived in the environment, and more
toward goals for self, and whether or not they could even begin to form goals for self in any one
person. And then I thought your description of Donald being fine until launch, and that it was
triggered in part by the disruption I was thinking too, that how that really describes the
functional role people play in the emotional system as being a way of deriving self, and that
when the functionality in the system is disrupted, if there's no solid self underneath, it's much
harder to figure out how to orient yourself so it to me, picked up the dependency piece on the
on other versus on self in a way that I hadn't heard. Thank you.

58:28
Yeah, I thought Donald description of Donald and how the psychiatrist framed the interaction
between his wife and him, with him really being in a no self one day on position, and her clearly
being an over functioning kind of person for him as a one important dynamic in What was
playing out. Okay, thanks, Amy. There's a comment in the

59:05
chat question, what motivated Coker to write the book

59:09
that's from Carolyn? As

59:10
far as I know this, Coker only had one other book that was listed. I forget his background, and I
don't think he explained, yeah, the question was, what motivated Kolker to write this particular
book get interested in this family, and I it may have been covered, but I don't remember now
offhand, how He learned about this family and decided to write about them. I don't know that
would be a very interesting question to have answered, but he definitely does his homework,
even though I call the book a documentary, not as maybe i. Solid as some documentaries, but a

pretty good effort to represent the family as it presented Himself to him, mostly the information
coming from surviving siblings. Donald, for example, is still alive and in that nursing care home,
and who goes to visit them all the time, good old Mary Lindsay. I mean, she definitely has
become big mother this generation and and then when her mother was dying, she was leading
the charge to be there for her and I uh,

1:00:43
anyway, I guess I'm getting a little away from what you asked. Okay, Margaret,

1:00:52
yeah, just a basic, you know, such a basic idea, but how different individual and family
perspective are just so radically different. And on a good day, I'll have an individual in my
office, but I'll ask myself, you know, what's the most serious symptom this group has popped to
try to get a read on the level of fusion and intensity, but it's such a basic idea, but so strikingly
different.

1:01:30
Yep, gotcha.

1:01:38
I think that's all Cheryl

1:01:42
Wester, how might a timeline further illuminate the incidents that beset so many family
members of this family. You want to

1:01:51
read that please? Yeah, how might a timeline further illuminate the incidents that beset so
many members of this family that was something I didn't have time to do in trying to make it at
least reasonably organized for today. But that could be another step, I think, with Donald's
story,

1:02:21
I mean how his symptoms

1:02:24
were clearly related to the changing context of his life, starting with the no self kind of
development, and then with his wife, he definitely became the passive one, and his she was the
gene was the over functioning one and and that's the way it was. I thought that psychiatrist
who noticed that Peter, the 10th son who was diagnosed initially with schizophrenia, then
bipolar, that scene with a family being seen at the hospital and the and the word was doing the
interview, noticing Peter laying his head on his mother's chest, and the look of contentment just
picked up both sides of this. I mean, on the one hand, Mimi could be mean and nasty and
dismissive and in the merry go round name denial for a lot of the crap that was going down in
her family and trying to hide it. So on the other hand, she was a tender, protective, available
mother, and I think as much to the girls as the boys, except she was more anxiously focused on
the boys, and maybe Margaret as the first girl. But I think, as I said, I think Lindsay came off as
the freest, and I wanted to have that as a comparison to her experiences, to Donald's, to try to
show you know how this development of a self can unfold over time. For a kid growing up, I
don't think we have enough information and studying about exactly how that works as yet,

1:04:22
there's a comment from Cheryl, if you want to reference that for yourself. There's a good
interview with Robert Coco

1:04:30
Oh in the New York Times Book Review

1:04:33
recent. I'll go.

1:04:37
We still have its last Sunday or

1:04:40
just next comment please for Sarah Davis.

1:04:44
Okay, Sarah Davis, go ahead, right there. Oh, could you share your thinking about the concept
of union disease from the perspective of this family, especially interesting as Don senior's
series of inflammatory problems do? CVA and cancer? Well, yeah, the way I think of the uni
disease is that the level of basic self, which is the mix of solid self and pseudo self that people

navigate with and the chronic anxiety that can be associated with that always looking at the
context, which biology has been trying to do for over 100 years is look at the context, the
context, the context, not just the individual part. And that book I read about philosophy of
cancer, I think is a huge step in that direction that you need systems thinking to conceptualize
the environment big time. But also, I've long believed that systems theory of the individual
would be useful in combining Bowen theory with the individual what these interactive
processes do and how they translate into physiological changes, etc. I don't know if I answered
your question or not. Sarah

1:06:18
Davis, go ahead, Sarah, if you're not clear if there you are, Hi,

1:06:28
did I get anywhere near what you were asking?

1:06:32
Yes, I just always want to hear more from you about the unit disease concept, and this was
making me think about it.

1:06:39
So, yeah, you theoretically the common denominator would be levels of basic self and the
chronic anxiety that's associated with that,

1:06:54
and the union

1:06:55
disease just suggests that where then that anxiety is bound within the individual. Bowen theory
is about where it's bound within the family. There's no comprehensive individual theory yet that
helps you understand where it's bound within the individual. But certainly genetics are going to
play a part in that, just like the overall context in any family, that person's brought into multi
generationally and currently, is going to be very important to understand about how to explain
what's going on. So the unit disease is some of the basic physiological processes are under, are
underneath every physical, emotional and social symptom out there, and that, I think it's
usefulness is in putting paying more and more Attention to the person's contact, text in which
the disease is incurring, and genes and diet that sort of thing are factors, but, but that's where I
got the idea. That was all. I saw multi generational patterns and diabetes, and compared them
with multi generational patterns and cancer, and they were identical. I think I wrote that up in

my chapter this time. That's what got me thinking, that is this all the same underlying process.
And then there's a guy at Peter Bent Brigham in Boston who is thinking about chronic
inflammation that way, and how it's part of so many clinical conditions, not all, but many,
many, many, and that would be a mechanism that what's involved, say, in cancer, may include
the same mechanism of what's involved in heart disease, and that's where the unique disease
idea comes from. That substrate to everything is what's key to understand.

1:09:13
The same internist from Harvard, he was saying

1:09:20
on in my building where I work, we do cardiovascular on the first floor, renal on the second
floor, pulmonary on the third floor, etc, etc, etc. He says, kind of crazy, because we're basically
all studying the same thing, and that, to me, came close to the idea of what I've tried to think
about as a union disease concept. Okay, Joan, you're on next.

1:09:53
Okay, thank you. Dr Kerr, I bought the book, but I haven't read it yet, but I'm looking forward to
reading it. I. Nobody commented on 12 children. So I don't know what to say about it, but I was
just wondering how that plays a part in everything, unless there's some kind of function it
serves. You know, if they lived on a farm and they were working the farm, I guess that could be
a help. I would think it'd be a stress. But I don't know if you have any comments on it.

1:10:22
Well, I remember, I think this was a phrase Murray sometimes used, reproduction run amok.
And I thought this was a case of reproduction run amok. This family took on more than it could
possibly adapt to, and that played a level in the chronic anxiety, no matter how hard Mimi
worked at it, and she really busted her bippy to to do right by these kids and but it was just
beyond what they could do. So that's the way I was thinking about it. It's it's reproduction run
amok.

1:11:01
And I think

1:11:05
likely he blames she blames him and him and he blames her for having these 12 kids. But I
remember when the doctors, after 10 boys said you've got to get your tubes tied. She didn't go
for it. No, I want two more. And she knew what she wanted. She wanted 12 kids. I don't know

why, but reminded me of my mother when I She was saying that? Well, I had four boys. Three
of them turned out pretty well that one of them was kind of a washout. Let's that's batten 250
in baseball. And this, this

1:11:54
family is batten 125,

1:11:58
it's run amok. I don't know. Would you have another way of thinking about

1:12:04
it? No, I was just thinking unless it lived on a farm, but that was maybe 100 years ago. A lot of
families had large lot of children who were workers. But yeah, I would think it'd be awful
stressful.

1:12:18
Yeah, that book, it just exudes it, particularly when they parents began to lose confidence.
Then you get the father getting a serious illness at an early age, age 52 and how much more
pressure that puts on the mother to take care of all these people. And she never doubted her
desire to do that. And all the healthcare professionals noted that about her, the so called, what
was the warrior, brave warrior, or something like that. Phrase, okay, Amy, back to the top of the
challenge, when did Don's move to dependence. Dependence occur in relationship to Mary's
growing up. I think he may mean independence. Does that shift move from Mimi and Don to
inside rather than a kid for the first time, we reread that, I'm not sure I fully understood it.

1:13:23
I could put some words on it, if that would be helpful. Sure what I was thinking about how
triangles shift and if sometimes it's preferable to be in the inside position. With this particular
mom, being on the inside position with her comes at a level of trading itself for both her and
whoever's on the inside, and as Don comes into a dependency due to his illness and decline,
does that free up the kids a little bit differently?

1:13:53
Well, by then,

1:13:56

forget what? What year he was 52 but Don, yeah, but yeah, he became, she became a
caretaker for him and the kids. I didn't read anything that led me to believe that things
between her and the kids were all that different. I was particularly impressed toward the end,
where she talked about how much Donald being in her life meant to her, and I mean, he was
like a companion for her, which is part and parcel of the other side of the process, anxious
focus, but also a dependency operating on both sides. That example with Peter, I thought was
beautiful for that laying his head on his mother's chest, omnipotent mother taking care of
dependent child, was the psychiatrist in Terp, and I thought he nailed it. I see

1:15:02
this coming from

1:15:07
Pamela. If Mary Lizzie were to come to you as a client, what do you see as the priorities for
coaching her? I don't know. I'd certainly want to know more about she's she's done a lot on her
own. She did have therapy for seven years an individual framework, but the therapist seemed
like an awfully good one, and she got a lot out of it. And if she came again later in life, I'd just
say congratulations on the objectivity you've already gained about looking at your family. It's
pretty impressive. By staying in contact, Margaret on the hand, stays away. She just can't if she
gets too close to the family, she just takes on the problem. And Mary is able to be with the
family and begin to think a little differently, being a little more forgiving of her parents, and I
just think of that, it's just this woman has gained some emotional objectivity in a unusual
situation like Murray left open. Differentiation of self is pretty much set by the time you leave
home, borrowing a structured effort to change it, or some unusual

1:16:32
event that

1:16:35
you had to challenge to deal with, like when seeing POWs In Vietnam when they got back, I
believe some of those guys really did gain from living in that situation for an undetermined
number of years finally got out, mostly about seven years. I forget if I'm too far afield from the
question, but

1:17:00
it was, it was. The question was, if Mary Lindsay were to come as a client, what do you see as
priorities for coaching? Oh,

1:17:09

1:17:09
yeah, I just, I just be, I'd start out being real positive about what she's accomplished. I mean, I
think she and was able partly because she could stay in contact. She had enough self to stay in
contact through difficult times. And you know, when her mother was dying, she was the one
that organized everything for help and was angry sometimes at some that didn't help, like
Margaret, which they settled that later on. So then we go from there. I don't know. I mean, she
came in to see me. Now, I'd love to meet her, but I don't know what the reason would be, other
than I try to give her another way to think about what had happened in the family, and she
might be receptive to that and find that very useful. You know, with a Bowen theory,
explanation and speculation in a way, but application to their family, I've started out with two
new people recently, and the wife got interested in Bowen theory. I think she read Roberta
Gilbert's work, and then the husband started googling things, and these two people started
devouring Bowen theory to the best of their ability, and then when they started the therapy,
they were on the absolute verge of divorce. I didn't think they were going to make it, but only
four or five sessions out, the wife who was kind of moving in that direction more than the
husband saying, Oh, I don't care you. Go. Go. Didn't really mean it,

1:19:05
but she was

1:19:10
able to say, I don't want a divorce. I'm not ready to live in the same house with you again, but I
don't want a divorce. I think we can that more progress needed to be made, and she's tried.
They've split before and come back anyway. It just reminded me how much theory can help if
people can be interested in theoretical thinking at the same time they're working on their own
problem.

1:19:37
You got three questions in the queue or comments. One is me, so I'll go first. Okay, you have
two more. So I was just sort of free associating about that quote you had at some point about
psychosis being what the brain does when it's just working very well. And I

1:19:58
mean, there's lots of ways to think of. Psychosis.

1:20:00
You can also think about sort of escaping into psychosis, and it brings a kind of anxiety relief.
But I was thinking back to the question about the unit disease, and, you know, I wondered if
eventually, total speculation, whether you know, brain inflammation will play any part in the
waxing and waning of psychotic symptoms for people who are vulnerable,

1:20:26
yeah, people are already considering that in schizophrenic episodes, that the inflammatory
system is somehow playing a role there. I think that's more and more accepted, so that

1:20:38
there is some evidence about Yeah, yeah, interesting. So,

1:20:44
okay, Eric and Vermont, Hi, Mike,

1:20:47
hi. So I was thinking about this case that you just presented. And I've just gotten so much value
from these cases over decades now, like the Kaczynski one, and I was having a thought
somewhat similar to the one I had last month about Kathy case, which is that, you know, here
you have this family where you have not only multiple schizophrenia, but also murders and
suicides. And like with Kaczynski, the level of symptom it's it goes well beyond schizophrenia,
you know. So I'm just thinking about this, this very, very extreme level of symptoms, and
maybe a little bit, you know, thinking about what Kim ziegelman said earlier, that I don't, I don't
have the sense in the Kaczynski case or in this one, that these family details pointing to The
undifferentiation provide a satisfactory explanation for the difference between that, that
extreme level, like Uber level, versus, you know, the the non murdering suit, schizophrenics, for
example. I didn't have that same feeling about the Adam Lanza case, as you presented it so
clearly, but I just wondered, if you know, I guess I was thinking, maybe, what are the other
factors along with the systems view, so valuable? Maybe within the systems view, but currently
unidentified, might help account for that,

1:22:45
the degree of dysfunction, you mean,

1:22:48
yeah, yes, very extreme level,

1:22:53
yeah, I remember, I think I'm quoting Murray correctly. He said, homicide is at a little higher
level than suicide. Really intrigued me, where that I never asked him exactly what he meant by
that. He never wrote about it. But yeah, I mean, how do you judge the variation and explain it

that. He never wrote about it. But yeah, I mean, how do you judge the variation and explain it
adequately. I don't think we can do that just yet. I mean, chronic anxiety is so incredibly
difficult to measure. As far as we know, nobody, I think, has made a serious effort to try. Maybe
they have, I know Sapolsky had a nice graph that along the lines of every time you get a bleep
in the immune system, it rises and falls. Next time maybe rises a little more and falls, etc, etc,
till it reaches the level it can unleash pathology. I don't know how he measured that or came to
that idea, but I don't know, variation is what you're talking about, right? How to explain it?
Yeah, yeah.

1:24:22
Thanks, yeah,

1:24:24
okay, Kenton,

1:24:30
yeah, I've really enjoyed this presentation, and I'm engaged by the book I'm almost halfway
through. Part of my interest is that I'm 11th of 12, and my parents, I think, might have a slightly
better batting average, but we have great variety. And I was trying to just think about if to
name the at least some of the they. Basic processes in this family is of just identified, you
know, just the the denial of reality, kind of refusal of the family leaders to regulate behavior,
and the way that certain amount of lawlessness and demanding for the uniformity of thinking.
And I don't know if it's because I'm co opted by the emotional process in society, but my mind
kept flipping to to the societal process and how, how this, this case study in the family,
informed some of my thinking and observing about processes in society. And may, I'll just stop
there, given the time, and just invite your any comments about how I mean, can we is that?
Can we make the extension from studying this regression of this family and similar process
observing in society, at least they seem apparent to me, but I just welcome your

1:26:22
I guess the this will seem relevant. Maybe I'm too far off. But when, when I read about this
woman applying systems thinking to cancer, and then I thought about applying systems
thinking to schizophrenia, that there seemed to be a lot of overlapping, and the way the two
people were thinking about it, and it gave me a little more confidence that that, yeah, I think
when we look at Bowen theory in the future, more and more, at many levels of organization
and society, and the animal kingdom, plant kingdom. We may see these parallels, but I don't. I
don't think we see them very well, yet I mean reciprocal functioning in the body is evident.
Regression in the body is evident, although most people wouldn't call it a regression. I would
call a growing cancer a regression, and this woman, who's applying it with system thinking, I
think, agrees with that. She didn't use that word, but what's going on in with the cancer reflects
what's going on in the larger context. It's not cause. The cause does not reside internally to the
cancer. But anyway, if I'm picking up on you the I think the future is seeing these parallels.
Yeah.

1:27:53
Oops. We started late, so I was just going to prevent myself the luxury of one other comment.
Sure, I was struck with your comment about the immune system, sort of each spike, priming it
for going higher the next time. And I was thinking about having had two aggressive rescue
dogs, and one of whom we had to put down eventually, and how each time it happened, it next
time it seemed to happen faster and quicker. And I'm just thinking that's probably a similar that
that adrenaline hyper Rush is probably something similar to what they're observing in the
immune system. They're probably similar processes in a number of different bodily systems
that, once they get going, they they sort of sensitize, I guess, and increase the probability that
it'll be an even bigger response the next time.

1:28:55
Yeah, I wish I could think of the article where I first read this, but this idea of habituation, where
that apparently, through the evolution of more and more complexity, the capacity to habituate.
In other words, if you react at level 10 the first time it happens, then you react level seven,
next time, then four, then two, you habituate. You're kind of prepared. You're talking about just
the opposite potentiate and I don't know, just an interesting thing to think about. I don't usually
think that way, what potentiates, but it's a good idea.

1:29:32
Well, that's what I thought you were reporting about the immune the immune response that
had been observed, yeah,

1:29:38
that definitely according to Sapolsky, potentiated until it reached the point of a

1:29:45
visible symptom.

1:29:50
I don't see a number in the chat. Okay, let's wrap up. Yeah, I have a three o'clock appointment I
gotta do right now. Wrap Up. Oh yeah, we're wrapping up. I just thought everybody knew,
thanks for coming See you in the fall. COVID free. Hopefully doubt it, but hopefully you.

